Fast Track to Happiness and Peace
A Very Brief Meditation and Recitation of the Medicine Buddha
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

Namo guru-bhaiṣajya-rājāya (Homage to the Guru King of Healing!)
Refuge and Bodhicitta
If you wish to practise the abbreviated meditation and recitation of the Medicine Buddha, then
begin by taking refuge and arousing bodhicitta three times:
sangye chö dang tsok kyi chok nam la
In the Buddha, Dharma and supreme Saṅgha
changchub bardu dak ni kyab su chi
I take refuge till enlightenment is realized.
dak gi jinsok gyipé sönam kyi
Through the merit of giving and the other perfections
dro la pen chir sangye drubpar shok
May I attain buddhahood for the sake of all beings.
Then meditate on the four immeasurables:
semchen tamché dewa dang dewé gyu dang denpar gyur chik
May all sentient beings enjoy happiness and the causes of happiness,
dukngal dang dukngal gyi gyu dang dralwar gyur chik
Be free from suffering and the causes of suffering,
dukngal mepé dewa dang mindralwar gyur chik
May they never be separated from true happiness devoid of suffering,
nyering chakdang nyi dang dralwé tang nyom tsemepa la nepar gyur chik
And may they dwell in boundless equanimity, free from attachment and aversion.
The Visualization
om sobhawa shuddha sarwa dharma sobhawa shuddho ham
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
tong pé ngang lé pé dé den gyi teng
Appearing out of emptiness, on a lotus and moon seat
rangsem hung yik ö kyi dön nyi drub
My own mind is the syllable hūṃ, sending out lightTo accomplish the benefit of myself and others.
tsur dü daknyi chomden men gyi la
The light returns, and I transform into the Medicine Buddha.
kudok tingka shyal chik chak nyipa
My body is deep blue in colour with one face and two hands;
chak yé chok jin chakgyé aru ra
The right, in the gesture of supreme giving, holds the arura fruit,
yönpé nyam shyak dütsi lhungzé nam
The left, in meditation pose, cradles an alms-bowl full of nectar.
tsenpé palbar chögö nam sum sol
Resplendent, radiant with major and minor marks of perfection, and clad in the three Dharma
robes,
shyab nyi dorjé kyilmo trung gi shyuk
I sit with legs crossed in the vajra posture.
yé su gyalsé nyi tar nang jé mar
On my right stands the red bodhisattva Sunlight,
chak yön nyimé tsenpé pema nam
His left hand holding a lotus on which rests the sun.
yön du da tar nang jé kudok kar
On my left is the white bodhisattva Moonlight;
chak yön dawé tsenpé pema dzin
His left hand holds a lotus on which is the moon.
nyika yepé chok jin chakgya dzé
Their right hands form the mudrā of generosity.
dar dang rinchen gyen dzok tsowo la
Adorned with all the jewel ornaments and silken garments,
düpé tsul gyi pé dé den la shyeng
They stand on lotus and moon discs, in reverent attendance on the Medicine Buddha.
tsokhor kün gyi né sum dru sum tsen
The three centres of the Medicine Buddha and bodhisattvas are marked with the three syllables,
dé lé ö trö chok chü gyalwa kün
From which light streams out to invoke all the buddhas of the ten directions
chomden men gyi lamé nampa ru
Who appear in the form of Medicine Buddhas
dün gyi namkhar benza sama dza
In the sky in front of me: vajra samājaḥ
dza hung bam ho rang la nyimé tim
With jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ they dissolve inseparably into me.
The Mantra Practice
tukkar da teng hung tar ngak treng lé
In my heart on a moon disc is hūṃ, encircled by the mantra māla,
ö trö pak chö dro kün drib nyi jang
Which sends out light to make offerings to the exalted ones and purify all beings of the two
obscurations.
sé ché gyalwé tukjé jinlab kün
The light returns, bringing back all the compassion, power and grace of the buddhas and bodhisattvas,
tsur dü dak gyü jingyi lab par gyur
Transforming my whole being with their blessings.
teyata om bhekanze bhekanze maha bhekanze radza samudgaté soha
tadyathā | oṃ bhaiṣajye bhaiṣajye mahā-bhaiṣajye rāja-samudgate svāhā
Recite this mantra as many times as you are able.
If you practise more elaborately, you can recite the long dhāraṇī.1 When you conclude:
Offerings
The wisdom being I am visualizing myself as now appears in space in front of me.
Then make offerings with:
om bekandze radza saparivara argham padyam puspe dhupe aloke gandhe naivedye shabda ah hung
oṃ bhaiṣajya rāja saparivāra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda āḥ hūṃ
Praise
tukjé kün lé nyompé chomdendé
Transcendent accomplished conqueror, for all of us your compassion is equal and the same.
tsen tsam töpé ngendrö dukngal sel
Just hearing your name removes the suffering of the lower realms,
duk sum né sel sangye men gyi la
And cures the diseases of the three poisons:
baidurya yi ö la chaktsal lo
Medicine Buddha, shining with lapis lazuli light, to you I bow.
Request
chomden deshyin shekpa drachompa
Transcendent accomplished victor, thus-gone one, foe destroyer,
yangdak dzokpé sangye men gyi lé
Perfectly enlightened Medicine Buddha:
dak dang tayé semchen tamché la
Grant me and all infinite sentient beings
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsal du sol
The siddhis, common and supreme.
Invitation to Depart
om bendza muh
oṃ vajra muḥ
khor dang den ö du shyu né rang la tim
The two bodhisattvas and lotus and moon disc seats melt into light and dissolve into me.
rang gi né sum du om ah hung gi tsenpar sam
I imagine my three centres are marked with oṃ, āḥ and hūṃ.
Dedication
gewa di yi nyurdu dak
Through this merit may I swiftly
sangye men la drub gyur né
Accomplish the Buddha of Medicine,
drowa chik kyang malü pa
And lead every single sentient being
dé yi sa la gö pa shok
To that state of perfection too.

Recite this and other dedications and aspirations. If you are doing the approach practice in
retreat, be sure to (observe a pure diet,) wash and keep everything clean, and recite 100,000
of the short dhāraṇī, plus an additional 11,000. In between sessions, do prostrations,
make offerings, either extensively or concisely depending on what is suitable, and read
either the short or long Medicine Buddha Sūtra, whichever you can manage.

The learned chadralwa Mañjughoṣa (Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo) composed this to answer a need. 
Through this merit, may it be a cause for peace and happiness for all beings. Maṅgalam!

| © Rigpa Translations 2019, benefitting from the translation by Ven. Khenpo Kalsang Gyaltsen
and Sakya Phuntsok Ling on the occasion of HH the 41st Sakya Trizin’s first visit to Washington
DC in 1989. Republished with permission and adapted for Lotsawa House, 2020.
↑ om namo bhagavate bekandze guru bindurya prabha radzaya tathagataya arhate samyak sambuddhaya
teyatha om bekandze bekandze maha bekandze bekandze radza samudgate svaha.