Sādhana of Bhaiṣajya Guru (Medicine Buddha)
by Karma Chakme

lama könchok sum la kyab su chi
I take refuge in the Guru and Three Jewels.
drowé döndu chomden men la drub
For all beings' sake, I shall accomplish the Buddha Bhaiṣajya Guru.
chö nam mikmé yené tongpanyi
All phenomena are beyond reference, primordial emptiness.
dé yi ngang lé rangnyi dren dzok su
Out of that experience, I appear, perfect upon recollection,
damyé yermé chomden men gyi la
As Buddha Bhaiṣajya Guru—samaya- and jñānasattva inseparable.
kudok ting ka shyal chik chak nyipa
His body is deep blue in colour and he has one face and two hands,
chak yé chok jin men chok namgyal dzin
The right hand in the supreme generosity mudrā and holding Myrobalan,
yönpé nyamshyak dütsi lhungzé nam
And the left, in the gesture of equanimity, holding an alms-bowl of nectar.
tsenpé rab gyen dorjé kyiltrung shyuk
He is fully adorned with the signs and marks and seated in vajra posture.
ku la chögö nampa sum gyi lub
And he is dressed in the three dharma robes.
pé dé teng shyuk özer pakmé tro
Seated upon lotus and moon-disc, he emanates countless rays of light.
tukkar da teng hung la ngak yé kor
At his heart, upon a moon, is Hūṃ surrounded clockwise by the mantra,
dé lé özer tröpé sharchok né
From which rays of light shoot out to invite countless Bhaiṣajya Gurus
men la pakmé jön né rang la tim
Who arrive from the eastern direction and dissolve into me.
lar yang ku lé özer tröpa yi
Further rays of light then emanate from his body once again,
tong tö drowé duk sum né shyi né
To pacify sickness and the three poisons in beings who might be seen or heard,
tamché lamé changchub tob gyur chik
So that they all attain unsurpassable awakening.
teyata om bhekanze bhekanze maha bhekanze radza samudgaté soha |
tadyathā | oṃ bhaiṣajye bhaiṣajye mahā-bhaiṣajye rāja-samudgate svāhā |
Recite this mantra as many times as you can. Then:
detar gom khen tamché rang gi sem
The one who visualizes all this is my own mind.
sem ni yömé tadral tongpanyi
Mind itself is emptiness, beyond the extremes of existence and non-existence.
gangshar ma yeng tsam du ngowo kyong
Whatever occurs, in simple non-distraction, I will sustain the essence.
dzinmé machö lhukpar gom shé na
Knowing how to meditate freely and naturally, without clinging or contrivance,
duk ngé né shyi chomden men la drub
Pacifies the sickness of the five poisons and accomplishes Buddha Bhaiṣajya Guru.
ditar gomdé jepé gewa yi
Through the merit of visualizing and reciting mantra in this way,
tong tö dren rek kün gyi né shyi né
May the sickness of all those I see, hear, think of and come into contact with be pacified,
chomden men la nyi dang yermé shok
And may we all become inseparable from Buddha Bhaiṣajya Guru himself.

As requested by Lharje Wanglu, this was composed by Arāga in the vicinity of the stūpa erected
by Chitö Orgyen.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2020.