The Profound Cure (Zabchema)1
A Practice of Bhaiṣajya-Guru, Lord of Physicians
from Karma Chakmé’s Mountain Dharma

rang gi tuk lé özer ting kha trö
From my heart, shoot forth dark blue rays of light,
sharchok baidurya nang shyingkham su
Which flood towards the east, to the buddhafield of Lapis Lazuli,
chomden men la shyukpé tukkar pok
Where they touch the heart of Bhagavat Bhaiṣajya-Guru, blessed Lord of Physicians,
ngön gyi damcha tukkyé mönlam dren
Who is thus reminded of his former pledges, his prayers and aspirations.
özer baidurya yi dok dra trö
In turn, he sends back further rays of lapis lazuli coloured light,
dak dang sungja nam kyi lü la tim
Which dissolve into my own body and all those who need protection.
né künwa mor nyizer pok drar gom
Thus, I imagine all diseases evaporating, Dwindling to nothing like frost in sunlight.
sangye men gyi la baidurya ö kyi gyalpo la chaktsal lo
Homage to the Buddha Bhaiṣajya-Guru, Lord of Physicians, Radiant Lapis Lazuli King!2
sangye men gyi la baidurya ö kyi gyalpö ngön mönlam chenpo chunyi tabpé denpa dang
Lord of Physicians, Radiant Lapis Lazuli King –By the truth of your pledge, your twelve great
aspirations,
denpé tsik dé dak sok semchen tamché kyi né tamché danta nyi du shyiwar gyur chik
And by the truth of each of your words, without exception,May each and every illness that affects
sentient beings Be pacified now, in this very instant!

teyata om bhekanze bhekanze maha bhekanze radza samudgaté soha | né sarva shanting kuru soha
|
tadyathā | oṃ bhaiṣajye bhaiṣajye mahā-bhaiṣajye rāja-samudgate svāhā | né3 sarva śāntiṅ kuru
svāhā ||

If you recite this mantra according to the severity of the disease, whether a hundred, a thousand,
or as many times as you can, you should have no doubt that all illness (other than
that due to the ripening of past karma) will be pacified. This is clearly stated in both the
long and short medicine sūtras.4

| Translated by Stefan Mang and Han Kop, 2017. Edited by Libby Hogg.
↑ The title implies that the practice is a profound way to eliminate, separate from and remove
all diseases. (Oral clarification by Khenpo Pema Namgyal)↑ The name of the ‘Buddha of Medicine’
is Bhaiṣajya-guru-vaiḍūrya-prabhā-rāja (sman gyi bla bai dUrya ‘od kyi rgyal po).
Here we have translated Bhaiṣajya-Guru (sman gyi bla) as ‘Lord of Physicians’ and Vaiḍūrya-prabhā-rāja
(bai dUrya ’od kyi rgyal po) as ‘Radiant Lapis Lazuli King’. Bhaiṣajya-Guru
more literally implies that the ‘Buddha of Medicine’ is both a physician (bhaiṣajya) and a
teacher (guru). Vaiḍūrya-prabhā-rāja more literally implies ‘a king who radiates with the
colour of lapis lazuli.’↑ Karma Chakmé inserts the Tibetan word né (nad) into the Sanskrit
mantra. Né translates as diseases. While the first mantra evokes the Buddha of Medicine,
the second mantra (né sarva śāntiṅ kuru svāhā) requests him to act. The second mantra can
be translated as ‘please pacify all diseases.’↑ This is a reference to The Sūtra Describing
in Full the Specific Previous Vows of Bhaiṣajya-guru-vaiḍūrya-prabhā (D 504, Skt. bhagavad-bhaiṣajya-guru-vaiḍūrya-prabhāsya
pūrva-praṇi-dhāna-viśeṣa-vistāra, Tib. bai DUr+ya'i
'od kyi sngon gyi smon lam gyi khyad par rgyas pa'i mdo) and The Incantation of Vaiḍūrya-prabhā
(D 505, Skt. tathāgata-vaiḍūrya-prabhā-nāma-balādhāna-samādhi-dhāraṇī, Tib. bai DUr+ya'i
'od gyi gzungs).